Among the clouds: The disappearance
of Lisanne Froon and Kris Kremes
It is said that in the “Pianista” trail,
near the town of Boquete in Panama,
one can walk among the clouds. The
trail is located at the Continental
Divide that traverses all of the landmass
of the American continent, dividing it
into two hydrological systems, draining to
either the Pacific or the Atlantic oceans.
The extreme humidity and altitude make it
a relatively challenging trail, with lots
of lush vegetation and animal life. Some parts
of it are also affected by yearly flash floods.
At the summit of the trail, the “Mirador”, there
is a small sign warning about going further down
the trail, towards the opposite site of where
it being next to the “ll Pianista” restaurant.
It advises tourists to not continue without a
guide or a local companion. Before 2014, there
was no sign at the summit. Another newer addition
to the trail is a small memorial, a red cross with
two names written on it: Lisanne Froon and Kris
Kremers. These young dutch women disappeared on
the “Pianista” trail while on a holiday in Panama
in 2014. The case made international headlines,
and shook both the Netherlands and Panama to
their core. But what do we know about what
happened to Lisanne and Kris? Only parts of their
bodies and some of their supplies were recovered.
Could there have been some foul play involved?
Or were they unfortunate victims of nature?
Lisanne and Kris
Lisanne Froon and Kris Kremers both grew up
in Amersfoort, a picturesque medieval town
in Central Netherlands. Lisanne was 22, she had
studied Applied Psychology, and is described by
The Foundation set up by her and Kris’s loved
ones as adaptable, inquisitive and thoughtful,
as well as sporty and a fan of volleyball. Kris
was slightly younger than Lisanne, at 21, and had
studied Cultural Social Education, specializing
in Art Education at the University of Utrecht.
The Foundation describes Kris as creative,
aspiring and really passionate about art and
education. On March 15, 2014, both women boarded
a plane in Amsterdam, headed towards Panama. They
had saved for six months to travel to the Central
American country, where they hoped to get to know
the natural landscape and the local people, and
had arranged to volunteer at a local rural school.
They also wanted to learn Spanish. A week
before their trip they had become roommates,
while also working at the same Café. The trip
was also a celebration for Froon’s graduation.
After some sightseeing and traveling around
the country for a couple of weeks, they arrived
in Boquete, a small town in the Panamanian green
highlands, near the Baru Volcano. In recent years,
the town has become a prominent sightseeing spot,
and a popular retirement place for older people
from Europe and North America because of its cool
climate and beautiful natural surroundings and
hiking trails. One of such trails is called
“El Pianista”, spanish for “The Pianist”.
Once Lisanne and Kris arrived in
Boquete to their host family’s house,
they headed towards the school where they had
volunteered to help the local children. There,
they found out that the school didn’t want any
volunteers that didn’t speak fluent Spanish,
in spite of the fact that they had received
confirmation from the school some days prior
about the volunteer program. They were supposed
to stay there for the better part of a month.
Throughout their first weeks in Panama, the
pair kept a diary and also wrote continuously
to their parents and family, and in the case of
Lisanne to her boyfriend back in the Netherlands.
Kris and Lisanne expressed their disappointment
about the volunteer work to their loved ones, but
also quickly started searching for other places
where they could volunteer in and around town,
finding a couple of possibilities. They also
both mentioned they were going hiking to “El
Pianista”. From several eyewitness accounts, it
seems the young women started their hike around
2pm on April 1st, 2014. The same accounts claim
they took a local dog with them, named “Azul”,
which is the Spanish word for blue. Azul
was the pet of the owners of “Il Pianista”,
a restaurant near the beginning of the trail
specialized in Italian cuisine. Some witnesses
claimed that they had warned Lisanne
and Kris about hiking the trail alone,
but it seems the trail wasn’t
particularly known as a dangerous hike.
The disappearance and its aftermath
Whatever shape these warnings about the trail
took place, the women apparently waved them
aside and went on with their hike. Many hours
later, Azul would come back from the cloudy
paths of “El Pianista” alone. On April the 2nd,
alarms would start to go off from the locals who
had met the women, including their host family,
a guide they had scheduled to meet the next day,
and the owners of Il Pianista. Some days later,
the women’s parents would arrive in Panama,
with Dutch investigators coming along with
them, and a massive search would start to
fruitlessly try to find Lisanne and Kriss. The
investigation would continue, but their families,
heartbroken, would head back home without
finding answers, at least for a while.
A couple of months later, on June 11th, a blue
lycra backpack was found at the edge of the
Culebra River in the Changuinola Province, more
than 15km from where the young women were last
seen. Inside, two mobile phones, undergarments,
two pairs of sunglasses, a key and 88 dollars
in cash were found. Also in the backpack: an
international insurance license for Lisanne.
The finding of the backpack sent the investigation
teams into full gear around the area where it was
found. Much has been speculated about the possible
mishandling of the investigation regarding the
backpack and further findings, especially in
terms of forensics. 13 DNA samples were taken
from the backpack by the Panamanian police.
From this, DNA was found in 3 of them, and
identified as belonging to two different women and
a man. None of these were matched with a person,
not even with Kris or Lisanne. A further Dutch
forensic team analyzed the backpack and its items,
but no DNA evidence was reported. Although many
fingerprints were apparently found, none of them
could be matched, and it was reported that some of
the evidence was accidentally contaminated by the
local police who handled the items originally. It
was reported at one point that one fingerprint had
matched a Panamanian database, but the information
was not confirmed. Throughout the trail,
both Panamanian and international newspapers
grasped at straws to keep the case in the news,
so a lot of conflicting reports
exist from contemporary sources.
After the backpack, suddenly some bones started
to appear most of them in the same general area
as the bag, down near the Culebra river, at
least a 15 hour walk from where the women were
last spotted. The Panamanian authorities
speculated that the remains had floated
downriver after the women had an unfortunate
accident. But not everything seems to add up.
Most of the bones found were completely
dry, without tissues or fat. Some of them
did have some tissue remaining, pointing to an
extremely different timeline of decomposition,
and according to some reports not really
matching with bones being a lot of time
surrounded by water in any case. Decomposition
rates can vary according to a lot of factors,
so the authorities theory
couldn’t be completely discarded.
One finding that baffled most of the investigation
team was the condition of one of Kris’s bones.
It had white discoloration, seemed almost
bleached. Several theories were advanced to
how this could’ve happened naturally. Some
experts at the time claimed that maybe the
bones were "exposed to the sun for a long
time or that the burial site corresponded
to an area of ​​very basic chemical
elements, affecting the phosphates
and calcium carbonates from each of the bone
components, causing the whitish coloration."
No cause of death could be
concluded from the bones.
Even later apparently some skin tissue was found
unattached to anything, muddying every theory yet
again. The remain barely had animal markings,
and some bones had root markings, which occur
when rootlets invade the bones after death,
complicating the possible timeline yet again.
The investigation and the known facts
Several possible avenues were followed by the
authorities concerning the possibility of foul
play. One of the possible clues found at the time
was a photograph taken from the phone of a local,
which, though in a really low resolution, shows
two young men and women, with the women fitting
roughly the profiles of Lisanne and Kris.
According to the metadata of the photo,
it was taken the day of the women’s dissapearence.
The Panamanian investigators later concluded
that the women in the picture were neither
Lisanne nor Kris, but never publicly said
how they came to this conclusion, neither
identified who these women were instead.
A lot of the speculation and investigation after
the finding of the belonging and remains was
related to the women’ phones and camera, to try
to reconstruct a timeline of what happened once
they were in the Pianista trail, and possibly
what went wrong. These are the generally agreed
upon known facts of what happened to them from
the evidence found on the phones and camera:
Lisanne and Kris embarked on El Pianista
on the 1st of April around lunchtime.
Subsequent photos found on the camera
match images from the summit of the trail,
so we know they reached the summit and
appeared to be mostly in good spirits.
Further photos from camera taken on the same
first day appear to be from further down the
trail, after the continental divide, but
haven’t been matched 100% to the area.
The phone’s records show the women tried to
contact an emergency number from the first
day afternoon, way before dark, according to their
phone logs. From then on their phones were barely
used for days, maybe to save battery power.
The girl’s camera was used again on April
8th to take pictures in the dark for a few hours
during the early morning. It is not clear where
these photos were taken, but a lot of them
capture really similar angles of the same
places. One of the photos shows apparently
blonde/reddish hair from an unknown angle.
After one of the phones ran out of battery,
another was turned on and off several times
and after a few times the PIN either wasn’t
entered correctly or wasn’t entered at all.
The whole Pianista area and the surroundings
were sweeped some days after the women
disappeared. If the timeline with the camera
stands then they were alive up to the 8th of
April but weren’s found by the rescue teams.
Their remains started to appear more than two
months after the women disappeared,
some up to five months later.
Mostly fragments of bones and skin were
recovered, a lot of them suspiciously
well preserved or in the case of Kris’s
bones, in an otherwise unusual condition.
The handling of the case by Bethsaida Pitti and
the Panamanian authorities has been criticized
both in Panama and the Netherlands, and
in several publications across the globe.
Some of the main issues are related to poor
handling of evidence, and rushing to conclusions
without fully looking into all possibilities. The
photos found in the SD card were edited to try to
make them “more visible”. One photo was missing
from the camera roll, as the camera count skipped
one number, which usually indicated an image was
eliminated when more photos were taken after it.
After some further investigation and
under pressure to come up with answers,
the Panamanian authorities concluded the
women likely died in an accident near some
well known “monkey bridges”, that are known
to be dangerous. Although no foul play was
concluded to have happened by the authorities,
dozens of both professional and amateur sleuths,
journalists and otherwise interested parties
have kept the case alive for almost a decade.
Occam’s Razor
We will now analyze some of the main
theories regarding what could have
happened to Lisanne And Kris, and apply
the principle of Occam’s Razor to it.
We will try to find the explanation that
required the smallest amount of assumptions
or of unknown information, as Occam’s Razor
posits that this is the most likely outcome.
The Accident theory: They fell down from
the monkey bridges and into the river:
This theory checks out with where
the bones were found, downriver,
and with some but not all of
the conditions of the bones.
Some individual bones found exactly next to
each other, 14 hours down stream from where
the accident could have happened. It is really
unlikely the bones would be found like this,
but still possible. Other bones and
remains were found in places further away.
The belonging and clothes were found in relatively
good condition, with low to no water damage. This
also seems relatively unlikely, but the
phones, for example, were found inside
a sealed ziplock, which explains their status.
The phones and camera records would seem indicate
that they were active several days after they
left, lost, but the searches that took place for
weeks did not find them. It is possible they
were still walking for days without running
into anyone from the search, but unlikely.
There are some assumptions we need to make,
but some of the evidence does seem to
point towards this theory as a solution.
The Foul Play Theory: Someone found them
on the trail, kidnapped and murdered them.
One of the strongest arguments for the
Foul Play theory is the weird behavior
and patterns with the phones and cameras, along
with their mysterious appearance months later.
It is plausible that the women continued
to use their phones sporadically, but it
seems strange that they mostly didn’t unlock
them nor attempt constant emergency calls.
The photos with the camera are completely
unexplained, though some have speculated that
if it was really them, they could’ve been trying
to keep an animal away with the flash photos.
Another argument for the foul play theory
is that a full sweep of the area after they
went missing found no trace of them, but some
photos are of days later. Again, is it possible
they were simply not found, but the searches
were really extensive through several weeks.
There is apparently one missing photo number in
the camera, according to the automatic numeration
of the photos. This would seem to indicate
that a photo was eliminated after further
photos were taken. This numbered photo would
be exactly between the last photos from the
day the women went missing, and the first photos
taken at night on April 8th. Though we can’t know
conclusively who deleted the photo or why, it is
suspicious that exactly that photo is missing.
Amongst the remains, there were no signs of foul
play, like the use of firearms or sharp objects,
found. Although this complicates coming to any
conclusion regarding foul play, it is difficult
also to confirm the alternative, the accident,
since so little of the bodies was recovered.
Both the Accident and the Foul Play theory require
us to assume several things we don’t know about
the timelines of the events and the evidence found
and missing. The main thing that would lead us to
believe the Accident Theory more easily is that
we don’t have to assume the involvement of a third
party, and we haven’t been able to conclusively
identify a third party for the Foul Play Theory.
However, there is some speculation
about a potential third party involved,
which could blow the case wide open again and lead
the investigators towards the Foul Play theory,
and the most recent developments
revealed in November of 2022.
The newest findings
In a recent podcast by Mariana Atencio
and Jeremy Kryt about the disappearance,
they go through the whole case, analyzing it
from every angle, even traveling to Boquete
and traversing the Pianista Trail. On the
sixth and final episode of the podcast,
they interview Margarita, the mother of
one of the the young men that appeared
in a photo with a pair of women that
some speculated were Lisanne and Kris.
The owner of the phone that took the photo,
Osman, died under mysterious circumstances some
days after the women disappeared. Although the
death was initially ruled an accidental drowning,
further testimonies, including by Margarita in
the podcast, seem to agree that there was foul
play involved. Details like the types of injuries
Osman had and the fact that some members of a
local gang disrupted the youth’s funeral seem to
support the idea that this was no simple drowning.
While being interviewed by Mariana and
Jeremy, Margarita claims that her son
was killed because he knew what had happened to
the “Holandesas”, Spanish for Dutch women. She
goes on to describe the specific scenario
she claims led to the death of the women,
which was relayed to her by a former member of
the local gang involved. This former member,
Jose Manuel, was also reported as having died
under mysterious circumstances, like Osman,
but a year after the events occurred.
Margarita claims he was killed because
his fellow gang members thought he was close
to revealing the fate of the Dutch women.
According to Margarita, a local gang known as the
“Bandida”, who had met and partied with the girls
before and who were apparently friendly with her
son, intercepted the women while they were on the
trail and then took them partying. During the
party, one of the women rejected advances from
one of the men, and then the whole group, drug
fueled and in a rage, abused and killed the women.
According to Margarita, every finding
after the first picture from the first day,
was planned by the gang as a way to hide what
they did. It if were possible to verify this,
it could help track with the weird
phone usage patterns, the later photos,
and even the potential deleted photos. It could
also explain why the belonging and remains started
appearing suddenly after several months, in weird
patterns and under suspicious circumstances.
The testimony of Margarita is paired
in the podcast with the finding of
independent detective Martin O’Donnell, who
has investigated the case of Lisanne and
Kris thoroughly and reached a conclusion that
was similar to what was claimed by Margarita.
The Panamanian authorities officially closed the
case years ago, deciding that the explanation
of an accident causing the disappearance was
what made the most sense. Years of sleuthing
by many independent parties had slowly uncovered
a lot of issues with the investigation, and even
though nothing is certain, it seems likelier
with each new revelation that some foul play
might have been involved. Since the disappearance
of Lisanne and Kris, several other people have
disappeared at or near the trail, with some of
the disappearances being investigated as murders.
If indeed a third party was involved in
the disappearance, it would be paramount
to bring them to justice so they can’t
do that to anyone else. But the truth of
the matter is that we don’t really know what
happened. Their families have suffered through
years of scrutiny and conflicting narratives,
through countless blog posts, forum threads and
anonymous sources. Hopefully their quest
for closure will be eventually fulfilled.
All we know is that Lisanne and Kris wanted
to walk among the clouds that day in April,
and that the best way to honor them is to
remember them as they were, two aspiring,
intelligent and vibrant young women whose lives
were tragically cut short. May they rest in peace.